Okay, so today is the 3rd of July 2019, this is after I do the Dows. Can you say your full
name? My name is Derek Patrick Gale. And what are your parents' names? Well, my mother's
name is Gwendolyn and my stepfather, Ruben Murray, because he's not my real dad, because
I've never met my real dad, you know. Which is something none of my existing family has
ever spoken about, you know. So I've never been able to find out who he is or what he
did or, you know, some secrets. Big secrets, you know, black people like, you know, you
don't get in conversation with them until you've been spoken to, you get me? So you
don't really know what's happening, you know. But, and I thought it was, but I didn't know
Ruben's family before I came to England. And I knew he wasn't my father, because that much
I knew, you know. So when I came here, I knew I was going to a house with my mother and
my stepfather, you know, but I didn't know how the reaction would be. But it was good
in terms of living, you know. There wasn't any animosity between either of us, you know.
My mother was more like, more dominant of the two, you know. So she, she was like, I
came here, but, you know, I look at it and I thought to myself, over the years and see
the years gone by, I was here to look after the younger ones more, you know, more than
actually looking after myself, you know what I mean. I was fed and I was clothed, stuff
like that. But other than that is do around the house, which, you know, when they're not
there, you know, make sure the kids are safe. So I've been doing safety work for quite a
long time, you know what I'm saying. So, you know, five kids, you know. But back home,
as a kid, we grew up with a large amount of young people, you know, because if I remember
rightly, I was counting the other day, my auntie in London, she had five children. My
one auntie, she had two. My other auntie, you know, it was like ten of us in the one
yard, you know what I mean. There used to be a gale yard. That's why the word yardie
comes about, you know, because everybody live in a yard. Because my grandfather, he owns
this property. So that was a gale yard. And further down the road, there was a property
which is called Clark's. And the fact that it was called a Clark yard is because they
were all relatives, but there was only one owner. He owns it and everybody built a house
on it, you know, family, a little house there, a little house there. And it's called Clark
yard. It actually was called James yard, because they were all James, the whole caboodle
of them, you know. So, you know, so kids were like close proximity when you're growing up,
you know what I mean. Uncles around you, you know what I mean. You have, like I was showing
you, I've got three uncles, you know. We were at similar age, you know, older than me, but
they were doing things which I was able to do as well, you know. So it was a happy medium
back home, you know. I had a fantastic time as a kid, you know, because we lived out in
the bush, you know what I mean. We had, my grandfather, he had goats, you know, he was
a farmer, he planted rice. I mean, he did everything, you know what I'm saying. He was
like, you know, and the most important thing, right, Premento, right. I don't know if you
know what Premento is, right. Premento, that part where we came from, Premento was the
main growth of stuff, right. And when the Premento season comes around, everybody has
to chip in, you know. We are the youngest boys, we are the one that climbs the trees
and breaks the limb down, and you've got some of them down there with a bag, because the
seeds, right, the seeds is the most important thing, right. And Premento season is like
a hard working time, right, because it's got to be dried, it's got to be picked, you know.
We used to have a little room at the back of the house, we used to have all the, we used to call them
crock-ass bags, and we used to fill it up with Premento, take it out, and in the night,
all the women and the neighbours come and we sit there and they're picking Premento
in the night, and we're talking dopey stories, you know. It'll be like, cool story going
on, you know. And if you have to get up and walk back to your house, it's pitch black,
you know what I mean. The living day life, you know what I'm saying, it's ridiculous,
but it was fun, you know. I didn't have to just go, and my granny used to say, you wash
your foot, you know, we had a top running into the yard just off the road, and the foot
pad leaves up there, and she used to come with the torch and say, go wash your foot,
and you know what I mean. So we had to run up in the dark to the top and you wet your
foot and run back, you know what I mean. I used to go, dopey! And those are the things
I remember back home, you know what I mean. We used to have goats, and like I said, we
get up early in the morning and goats gotta go out, right. And we had a property, we used
to call it hilltop, it's like that. But when you get to the top, it's a pure level, you
know. But the goats, they know the way up and down. We used to have one called Billy,
because he's a ram goat, you know. We used to call him Billy, tie a thing around his
neck, and he takes a plaque up to the hill. And this is before we got to school, you know
what I mean. And we used to go to a school called Petersfield, which is like from here
to Grangetown, probably further. But we used to walk, but we never used to walk by the
roads. We used to walk in between properties. We know there's footpath leading, you know,
so you come across mango trees, there's nisberry trees, there's squabber trees. So you leave
home and you don't get to school until ten o'clock, you know. And the teacher, Mr. what's
his name, I never forget, Mr. Dunn, he used to meet us halfway down the road with a big
bloody belt, you know what I mean. But we got him tricked anyway, because they used
to have a thing called a corage. It's a herb. You rub it in the middle of your hand, it
makes your hand go numb. So you can't feel anything, you know. The only time, don't let
him hit you over the palm. That's where it hurts. So if you rub it in, if it touch anywhere
on your skin, you come out in a rash, you know. But if you rub it in your arms, palms
like that, it makes the middle of your hand go numb, you know. And he used to come, you
know. And he used to say, hold out your hand. This is at the school gate before. Hold your
hands. Used to hit you in your arms, you know. But if you tried to run, you used to try and
get your legs. This was a running battle between the school and the kids, you know what I mean.
So, but the worst thing is, if they send a report home to your grandparents, they'll
be late to school, you know. Then you get another beating, you know. And that's how
it was. It was joyful to go to school. Because when we lived, we had a path running right
along our house, right. We used to play cricket out there and stuff, right. And there's a
place behind us called Goldsmith, a different little community. So if you walk down a path,
it takes you ten minutes. But if you have to walk around, go around, it takes you another
half an hour. So being, you know, so we used to control that lane, you know what I mean.
So anyone we falling out with, they ain't gonna pass, you know. We'd be stoning them
or whatever, you know what I mean. Used to wait for them at the bottom of the property
because you'd swap from the house down there and this would be a footpath. And there's
houses behind us, you know. Because there was no barter or such, you know, by the trees
and whose land is that, whose property is that. You know, there's no fencing, you know.
But there's certain people that'll protect their property like the plant, certain mango
tree, you know when the mango is gonna drop and, you know, they'll be waiting for you,
you know. You know, you could see people running through the cane field, you know.
Oh, Mr. Harp is coming, you know what I mean. Try to get away, you know what I mean. And
that's how our life was, you know what I mean, back home. But when you came to England, everything
stopped. You're thinking, what the heck. I mean, you have to pay for everything, man.
That's when you start paying, you know. There's no cricket field unless you pay to play, there
is nothing, you know. And where my parents lived, it was a coal industry, not steel industry,
you know. It was like, West Midlands, you know, heart of the West Midlands, basically
steel. You know, my father, stepfather used to work in the London Steel Works, you know,
which is like five minutes away. You could smell it, you know. My first thing in the
morning, I'd steal, they'd steal, truck, steal, you know. And I hated it, to be honest,
you know. I did not like living there, you know. I used to go out, used to get locked
out of the house because, you know, 10 o'clock come, you're not home, you know, you don't
come in. You know, that's how my mother was, you know, because I fought E-Works, shift
works, you know, on and off, you know, stuff like that. So, yeah. So I think I spend about
after I left school, about 18 months at home, you know, and went to live in Wolverhampton,
you know, because I had a problem, you know. You know, I was the problem, I was like, house
problem because I go out and don't come back here and I go try and get, go to a, because
I'm beginning to know a few people from Dudley because Dudley was two minutes away, you know,
Dudley Zoo and places like that. So when I leave Wolverhampton, when I went to live
in Wolverhampton, I know the area, so I'm able to come back, like, to a place like Dudley,
you know, where I used to go with my mother, pull in the trolley every Saturday morning,
you know. I mean, that was, those days were done because I'm independent now, I live
by myself, you know. I have different friends in Wolverhampton, start coming back to Dudley,
Queen Mary Ballroom, which is where Lenny Henry used to perform before he became big,
you know. And used to be running battles with Hell Angels because Hell Angels used to be
part of that gang then, because they used to control the Dudley, the Queen Mary Ballroom,
as it were, you know, and they used to be, they did not like black people, you know what
I mean. They did not like black people. So we all used to catch the bus from, from Wolverhampton
to Dudley, and if you're from Wolverhampton, it makes you a Wolverhampton supporter, you
know, in football, right. Outside of Wolverhampton, a place called Garnall, from Garnall to Dudley
and the rest of the areas, or West Bramwich Albion, you know, the baggies on the walls.
So you get to a certain part of, they stone the bus, especially if you see a black man
on that bus, you've got to put the seats up against the door, against the windows,
you know. That used to be a regular occurrence on a Sunday night, because the police would
be out there waiting, because this is one of those stops where the bus has to stop,
you know. I've been on the bus, rather than go down that way, they drive round and go
to the police station, because they'd be chasing the bus, you know, and stuff like that, you
know what I mean. Yeah, so I live in Wolves. I got to know people, because I didn't know
anyone around there, got to know people, made friends with, you know, with all the, because
Wolverhampton is very black-oriented, you know, there's a lot of black people living
there, West Indians. So that's where my story is different from Glaston, in a way, because
I, Wolverhampton is a bigger town, more people, music, you know, and the police, you know,
and that's where I get involved with the music thing, because we set up a sound system, you
know, a group of us, you know. Little sound we had used to play, you know, Spiderman sound,
we used to call ourselves and play, you know, people used to turn up, all of a sudden people
start coming, you know, get bigger and bigger, and you know, so, and that's how it was.
Then we start travelling outside of Wolverhampton, it's a good place, like Manchester, you know,
so I knew the culture of the music then, and once I got into a bit of trouble in Wolverhampton,
well, until this day I think we were innocent, but I think because we were young black kids,
and the racist vibes then were rivers of blood by Enoch Powell, and I was watching a program
the other day, and you know, I didn't know this, but he was the man, he was the home
secretary firing secretary, I don't remember what it was, but when they started to recruit
West Indian people to come to England, he was the man that actually went to the Caribbean
and started recruiting nurses and telling people come to Britain, get a life, you know,
education, etc. And he's the one that turned around and told them, stop, because we're
going to have rivers of blood and stuff like that, you know, and I mean, the racist thing
was, you know, this is like back in the 70s, you know, 75, you know, I've only been in
the country about, what, possibly about less than five years, you know, so five of us end
up in Crown Court, because we got attacked, we got attacked, we didn't attack anyone,
the one guy fell through the glass window, the one white guy, he was from Newcastle,
he was Newcastle supporters, and he fell through the glass, and they say that they were stabbed,
but you see the trouble is we didn't have anyone to defend us, to say, well, you know,
we were just in court, they gave us a lawyer, I end up in bloody Staffordshire Crown Court,
you know, it used to be called Staffordshire Assizes then, before Crown Court, I mean,
I was sitting there, I was stood there, and the judge was bloody over there, half a mile
away, you need a bar necklace to see this guy, you know, so anyway, they say we started,
they had me, what was the charge they put on me, causing an offrate, didn't know what
that was at the time, and two of my friends, they got jailed, you know.
How old were you?
17, 18, you know, and yeah, I was around 18, you know, and the only reason we were in that
part of the town is because they wouldn't let us black people in any club unless you
knew someone who works there, or you're friendly with the doorman, but I had a friend who works
in the bar downstairs, and he used to let us in off the street, go to the bar, and upstairs,
I used to hide in the dark, just to, you know, because the bouncers, they used to come around,
and you know, so we used to just smell her out in the, because it was quite a dark dance
room, you know, just split up, and just to be in there, you know, and we, but we had
to get there before 11 o'clock, because they closed the downstairs bar, and that's where
we were going, we were on our way to this club, when we got attacked, and we end up,
my friend end up in hospital, and also all hell broke loose, so I had a friend living
in Birmingham at the time, so I thought, oh, you know, I couldn't even tell my mother then,
because my mum just lived up the road, you know, and they said, oh, you've got to have,
who's your next of kin, you know, and I'm like, oh, my mother, so, because I went to
live in Birmingham then, at the time of the friend, not live, but stayed with him, because,
you know, hopefully this thing would blow over, but never quite did, because I went
back to Wolverhampton, because I was signing the dole, and you know, when you go there,
give you dole check and stuff, so, went there one morning, and they were waiting for me,
the police, they, it was even on the radio, it was the most frightening thing, you know,
I'm telling you, so anyway, went through that, and they took me to this police station
called Red Lion Street, little danger place, you know, so I gave my mother's name, and
I, oh, my God, it's the worst thing I did, she comes there, you know, she weren't happy,
you know, she said, you don't live at my, I've got five children, and they live at home,
in other words, you know, you're not included now, you know what I mean, the five that's
at home, they're on my priority, you know, you're moved out, you know, get on with it
then, you know, and that, you know, okay, went through the system, got to court, they
found me 30 pounds, this is not in 75, I mean, 30 pounds is a hell of a lot of money, didn't
you know, I thought they'd forgotten about it, didn't I, and it must be about two years
later, this guy come out, I don't know how they found out where I was, boom, boom, boom,
knock on my door, it's Mr. Gable, I'm saying, yeah, he says, oh, we've got to go, we have
a date, I'm like, yeah, where, Winston Green, that's the police station now, the jail house,
took me straight to Winston Green, 30 days, so they put me in the cell, and I was like,
no, you know, and I don't, I think they're probably trying to frighten me, because the
cell, the wing, which they put me on, it was like, I'm walking along the corridors, and
I'm like, and in them days, they had little cards by the door, and it tells you how long
you're doing, and I'm walking along the door, I'm like, life, 20 years, this is what I'm
like, you know, and I remember there was a group of Chinese guys, it was a big thing
back then, you know, and they had, they all had 20 ideas each, because they were a harrowing
gang, right, and I'm like, Jesus Christ, it's a frightening thing in my life, right, so
they put me in the cell now, about two o'clock in the morning, I don't know if, it was late,
right, I could hear keys rattling, I could, and they opened the door, because I was in
there by myself, there was a bunk bed in there, but I was in there, and I, you know, opened
the door, and I look up, I seen this guy walking, right, this man was about 6'6", you know,
big strapping white guy, I like my hat, I'm like, what the hell, you know, and I'm like,
why are they bringing him this time of morning, right, so I'm on the bottom bunk, shaking
like a leaf now, right, and I hear someone who goes, you're up mate, I'm like, yeah,
yeah, yeah, right, he said, don't worry mate, I'm only here till in the morning, I'm going
to Leicester, Leicester, you know, so they brought this guy from London, because Leicester
is closer, and he's in court in Leicester, so they brought him in overnight, right, with
no one else's knowledge, and stick with myself, this guy was only a cop shooter, innit, his
name was that guy, he was a big, he killed some policeman in London, right, so, anyway,
they stick him in the cell with me, you know, I'm like, oh my God, you know what I mean,
I thought to myself, I don't like jail, I don't like jail, you know, and I came out,
and I moved to Birmingham then, and I moved to Edgbaston, you know, which was like, actually
I moved to a friend of mine called Robert, because I knew him from Wolverhampton, so
we got a flat together, both of us, and went to live in Edgbaston, City Road, you know,
and, but he was still working in the, further on in the Midlands, because he'd been working
there all his school life, a place called Darleston, and he says, yeah, I'll move to
Birmingham, let's get a flat together, man, so we went there, we got a flat together,
share a house, you know, in Edgbaston, yeah, and from there, you know, the front line was
just down the road, you know, I'm quite acquainted with black people now, I can move around,
music business, and I got a job at Quick Save, there's a company, a Welsh company, yeah,
Quick Save, and they opened a big warehouse in a place called Tipton, so we all went there
for a job, and we all got a job there, you know, it was about eight of us black guys,
you know, and we all started working there, you know, and the money was quite good, but
what it was, you could do a lot of overtime, right, so we used to go work at ten o'clock,
and come home at ten o'clock, you know, piling up the cash, we were earning good cash, you
know, and we had a flat, you know, we didn't worry about cooking, there was Mavis, Miss
Mavis down the road who cooks, we'd order dinners, Mavis, we're coming for dinner,
make sure you put the dinner up, you know, and the gambling is going on, we're playing
cards, so sometimes I come from work, I don't even bother to go home until bedtime, you
know, because it's so busy, there's the herbs man there, the pubs there, you know, it was
front line, this is the, you know, we never used to go to the city centre or anything,
everything you do in a community, you go play gambling, you lost your wages this week,
next week you'll win it back, you'll win back the same money you lost, you know, you're
not, you used to go around in circles, so you never used to have to leave the area,
you know, because the blues, this man called Dyke, he had a hairdresser shop, weekend,
he popped all the hairdresser stuff up and put the sound system in, you know, the pubs
across the road, you know, like it is on city road now, you know, you don't have to walk
far to get fresh product, because, you know, in the middle of Zoroastrian land, you know,
with the black community, you always get the food, you know, like I went to buy a piece
of yam the other day, I'd have to touch about 10 pieces before I feel what I want, you know,
because they've got it so long, but back then you could go and get the fresh stuff, you
know what I mean, and yeah, and that's how it was, everything was good, then a new influx
of West Indians start coming in now, this is like the early 80s, coming, you know, and
there's a new influx, and they've just, they change the whole, they change everything at
that point, you know, because when we came here, we came here, we went to school, we
did this, we did that, but the influx which was coming in, they came in after they were
in the school, I don't, you know, most of them came in on visas and coming as musician,
but they're not, but you could get a visa that way, you got to have a, you know, so
most, and there used to be a lot of artists from the Caribbean coming to England, you
just latch onto one of them, you know, and say, oh, I'm a drummer, I'm a diss, I'm a
that, I'm a that, bing, bing, bing, visa, but most of them are gangsters, to be honest,
you know what I mean, I'm not talking, you know, they were, you know, and they had one
intention, earn money, money was their objective, money, money, and they'll do anything, you
know, anything, so therefore it becomes a war between themselves and people which are
already there, you know what I'm saying, like for instance, I used to go into the cafe where
we used to go for years and sit down, have a laugh and joke, play music in the back room,
all that stuff, because certain people start turning up, you know, I mean, so I left, you
know, you could see, well, I could, I could see what direction it was going, and once
I came to live in Cardiff and that, there's a few people I'd known back then who died,
who got killed, who was doing life and doing a lot of jail time because of certain things
that happened in their lives, you know, and you know, and that's how it was that time
when I left to come to Cardiff, because I'm thinking, you know, I didn't have a profession,
I'm living just on the main and where am I going to go, you know what I'm saying,
it's like, and I don't want to go to jail, I hate that place, you get me, so I thought,
my friend, you know, I had a friend who was a builder doing plaster and stuff like that,
and I used to work with him from time to time, you know, and the reason I, in Newport, they
were building a new estate, what's it called, anyway, they're building this new estate
and he had a job there working in some of the houses and, you know, did plastering,
you know, and I used to come up with them and that's how it goes, you make a few young
ladies at the time, oh, come and stay with us, you don't have to go back to Brom, you
know, and stuff like that, and you know, and you start linking people, I used to come to
Cardiff and, of course, Newport, see, you would not believe, I reckon there's more
black people at that time living in Newport than there were in Cardiff, you know, the
real genuine West Indian, because if you go to Newport now, there are, well, I don't know
about now, but then there was quite a few West Indian, really, proper West Indian you
could deal with, there used to be a food shop there, there used to be a lady there, there
used to be a cafe called Silver Sands, which was like very popular, you know, food shop
upstairs, dance underneath, you know, and it was people from Bristol, they all used
to go there, you know, you cannot believe, right in the middle of Newport in Pyle, you
know, and that's, you know, and it was a regular thing to do, so we're going this weekend,
oh, we're going down to Newport, man, the Pyle thing is kicking, you know what I mean,
because there's a lot of girls from Cardiff used to go down there, you know what I mean,
because, you know, to be honest with you, the girls that were living in Cardiff at
that time, they weren't interested in the Cardiff men, because they were kind of slow,
they weren't up to date, you know, Glaston, he's saying everything is good, you know,
we kind of opened their eyes, really, when it comes to entertainment and music-wise,
because they had the Casablanca, but the Casablanca was entertained by outsiders, you know,
it's our sound system from Birmingham, from London, Bristol, so you get a lot of influx,
especially this time of the year, you know, coming from all over, you know what I mean,
and having loads of babies and gone, you know what I mean, and so when I come, and I, you
know, I stayed on and stayed on, even myself, I got caught up, because I had a girl, my
son, mother, and that's how we linked up, because we used to go out, because we were
like modern day roads, but in a good way, you know, trouble a lot of girls, don't be
so honest, you know, so I came and I thought, when my son was born, I think, sheesh, I'm
going to do it myself now, you know what I mean, 90% of the men I know who had kids,
they took us back to their own community and do what they do, you know, but I didn't have
any ties of anything, I had no other kid, and he would have been, he was my first, you
know, so I stick around, and I thought, I'm getting older, I have to be doing something,
you know, and that's when I told you I went to see this guy in NACRO, right, NACRO, I
think, what the hell, he sounds black, you know, NACRO, but it was an agency for people
who had been inside and they're trying to, you know, reestablish themselves back in the
community, but I didn't know that, and I went to see them, and he told me about, he
said, he only asked me what I can do, I didn't have a profession, I said, I can do anything,
man, I'm a sporting man, he said, yeah, you do sports here, took me up to Pentium, and
that's, didn't go long ago, that was back from 1982 or something, and he just dropped me
off, I met this lady, she was the, what you would call them now at the time, she wasn't
the education officer, she was the youth officer at the time, because they had two back then,
they had their education and they had the youth, and she was the youth, so her boss
was the education officer, so she said, oh yeah, come and have a job, part, you know,
and paid at the time, so I started doing it voluntarily, and I told you about, she got
me my first bank account, you know, which I still got now, worked up in Pentium for
about 10 years, working with young people, doing travel, and that's where I began to
think, oh man, I love this, you know, because I'm doing things now which I've never done
before, you know, I mean, which I would not have done if I had still been living in Birmingham,
even though I didn't go to college, but they helped me with the youth and coming to courses,
you know, just got to County Hall every Wednesday, and I got through that, and I've done the
outreach up in the Breckhens and stuff like that, you know, and that's how it's been,
that, you know, working from one centre to the next, just doing the things which I enjoy
doing, which was the sports side of it all, you know, I mean, I wasn't very good with
the paperwork, you know, I never bothered with that, so that's what I'm saying, the
thing I regret is not to pursue some kind of education, you know, because I can read,
I read, I read, I read anything, you know, reading is not a problem, it's my writing
is a problem, and tell you why, I used to work, and I think, I know everything, I look
at everything, I can read it, and I understand it, but I cannot put it down on paper, in
sentences, so I'm working, I'm doing an after school club over in, when I worked in Cardiff
High, I used to do Cardiff High lunch club, and I used to do after school club, I used
to pick the kids up from Redepenn High School, I mean, these are just babies, you know what
I'm saying, look at me, black man from nowhere, walking with doctors and whoever children
they are, you know, grabbing their bags, but I was loving it, you know, and so I went back
up one day, because I used to go there for three o'clock, right, because I used to
work, I used to do some cleaning job down in Cardiff Bay, because it was just been
building a new cinema complex down there, and I'm thinking, shit, I have a choice,
go back to Berlin, just try and do something, so when my son was born, and I decided to
get a job, you know, so I'm going down there, actually, there used to be an agent's and
city road agency, right, and I used to go to the local shop there, it was a coloured
guy, I can't remember his name, but I used to be friendly with him, you know, so I used
to go in, I said, hey, what's going on, I see loads of people coming in there, right,
he says, do you want a job? I said, yeah, I said, I don't want it too far, because I
haven't got a car, right, so he set me up, he got me a job down in the bay, just doing
basic cleaning in the cinema, you know, so you got to be there at six o'clock, you know,
I said, no problem, I cycle down there, used to do that, and when my second daughter, Sophie,
was born, she used to live around the corner, I used to zoom, zoom, zoom, cycle down there,
get back up, come on for a couple of hours, then I had to go to Riddipennine, got to
be there for three o'clock, pick the kids up and that, and then from there, six thirty,
I used to cycle to Pentwin, up to the Dome to do euphoric then, you know, so it's like
three days a week, it's like that's Riddipennine, you know, back and forth, you know, and that's
how life, that's how it's been, and so I went to pick a kid up one day, he had to do, stay
over and do some extra work, so I got to the school now and I'm speaking to the teacher,
she says, oh, the reason why Rachel, she's got dyslexia, I said, what the hell is that?
And then she started to tell me what it is, I'm thinking, maybe that's what I've got,
because I go to, because when I started first with the euphoric, right, this was the friary,
the old friary, right, I put myself on a course there to improve my writing skills or whatever,
you know, I did that and I'm like, I did it for about four months, man, and I just could not
get my writing together, you know, even though I know what I want to write, but I just could not
put it down on paper, so I thought, oh, look at this, I'll give up, I basically give up,
you know what I mean, I basically, but I'm saying, there is that thing out there, no one knew what
it is, even now, you know, you put that in the black community, they don't know what it is,
you know, and those are the things which probably holding back a lot of black people, you know,
because, you know, even now, I'm in Kiteiz and I can write and stuff like that, but I'm scared,
you know, people might think you're a dobat and that, but it's not a case of being, it's all up there,
like I'm telling you, I'm going to write a book one day, because I've got it up here, you know,
I haven't forgotten nothing at all, you know, things I've been through and stuff like that,
you know, but I want my kids to be, because, you know, they're hard work too, you know, when you go
and work with other people's children and you get the most respect and, you know, they're not
disrespectful at all, they're, you know, but my two daughters, I've got two daughters and they don't
seem to get on, like Lassandra said, they're from different mothers, but I've always been there,
you know, even though I don't really get on with the mothers anymore, because I've been with Suna
for about over 15 years, you know, and it's her, we've done a lot of things together, you know,
we do a lot of travelling, you know, I mean, the first time I went back to Jamaica, it was because of her,
you know, because she's been there prior and that, and, you know, she speaks, she knows how to deal with
all these holiday people and etc., you know, probably I wouldn't have learned to do that,
and, you know, and through that I learned to deal with all that, you know what I'm saying, so,
for my children, they always, they come, she remembers their birthdays, she remembers,
so, it's Sophie's birthday or it's Alexia's birthday, she's got it all covered in that angle, you know what I mean,
so, you know, it's just that they, you know, I want more from them, but then again, who knows,
my parents probably wanted more from me, but they're healthy, they're good health, you know,
and I'm happy with that, you know, they're all out there doing their thing, they're working, they don't do drugs,
you know, so, altogether, I think Cardiff's been, you know, Wales has been good for me, from what I was,
you know, even though I didn't get into any trouble, you know, and stuff, but I'm more involved with my family
now than I was when I was living there, even though they were closer, you know what I mean,
and, you know, because I've got three sisters, I can pick the phone up to any one of them at any time,
and, you know, they will be there, when I was living in Birmingham, I would never go near the house,
you know, the fact is, what my mother's going to say, you know, because to be honest, I was kind of scared of my mother,
and I think what it was, because I didn't bond with her when I was a kid, my grandparents was my mum,
my grandmother was my mother, you know, her mum around my life, you know, and grandfather came to England,
my mother, she had her own children, you know, there was nothing there to say,
I remember you and I was like two or three years old, because I don't, you know, I can't say I remember at all before I came to England,
you know what I'm saying, I came here when like 14, 15, it's like this is the first time we've met, you know,
so you can imagine it was hard to settle in the house, knowing I got two other brothers, which are half brothers,
and their father live in the house, you know, they don't think that, see, but they don't know what goes through your head,
because I can see, you can see, as a man, you come from the Caribbean as a youth, you're older than them, you know more than them,
you know, and their father is there, they're like, they're these are my boys, you know, and you know, and that's how it is, you know,
so I think I got out at the right time for them to strive, and they did, you know, even on harsh circumstances,
you know, they all, one, two, three sisters, they all went to uni, got good jobs, paid work, married, settled down,
and they all live happily ever after down there now, and I can go visit whichever, you know, I mean, and the relationship is good,
you know, compared to what it was when I first came to England, and living in the West Midlands, I hated it, you know, at the time,
you know, at the time, you know, I hated it, you know, and I come to ways, you know, and like Glasson's saying,
I know there's a lot of prejudice, prejudice going on, but I find I get more prejudice from the black people than I do from the white people,
you know what I'm saying, because I go into, going down there in Butown now, which I didn't grow up down there,
I go down there as an outsider, which they do, if you're not part of that community from, you don't get a bloody, you know what I mean,
they're very cautious, you know, you interfere with any other, you know, the girls, they're all someone trying to knock you back,
because of all that, you know, but keeping the blues, you know, they all used to come to the blues, you know, oh, oh, Brammy, they're, you know,
they don't like it, you know, so it's been a, you know, but I tend to keep out of that type of thing, you know, rather than get involved,
because I know you come down here, because we all do, we come down here and you see things looking quiet and everybody's happy,
you think, oh, we could do this, we could do this down here, but I do, I know a lot of people who've done that and end up in jail,
come down here, get involved with certain things, I'll be like, hey, don't you be doing that, you know, it's easier, next thing you know,
they're doing sentences and I've got my friends, you know, who came down here, got involved with whatever they do and they end up in prison, you know,
I came down here, I've been down here, what, God knows, about 40 years, near enough, I've never been to jail, I've been to court, you know,
yeah, I mean, you know it is, you know, women report you to police or, you know, just because you're telling them the right thing,
not because you're doing anything wrong, you know, you're telling them the right thing, you know, and they're like, I'm not having that,
but down here, the policemen, they didn't know, they don't know much about black people, see, and that's the trouble with this, with Cardiff,
they do not know anything about Caribbean people, you know, they don't know how they tick, you know, it's like in the youth service,
you don't see many black youth leaders or shop workers, you know, like you'd see in the West Midlands or anywhere else,
you go into any one of those like boots chemists or any one of those boutiques or footwear shops, you know,
there's black guys working all over the place down here, you very rarely see them, I'm thinking, is it because they're black,
is it because, you know, are they that stupid? But no, I think it's improving, you know, than from 10 years, 15 years ago,
you know, the racism thing is coming more to the fore and says, hey, there is racism out there, you know what I mean,
there's a lot of it out there, but no one take any note, it just comes natural to most people, you know, they say things to you and you're like,
oh, you're my friend, I'm not racist towards you, you know what I mean, I said, mate, you racist to that lady there,
you racist to me, because you might not say the same thing to me, but you'll say to someone else about me, you get me,
that's racism anyway, you know what I mean, you don't be, oh, you can be racist to that man there and not be racist to me,
because you're my friend, you know, so, you know, so it is, isn't it, you know, because I've got three children anyway,
I haven't got any kids, any one son, he's a big man now, I don't even know, he was in Jamaica the last time,
but I've got three children, I've got one son and two girls, and I've got three grandchildren, four, three girls and one boy,
you know, and I see them all the time, you know, they're back and forth, you know, I go and visit them, you know,
so, and that's it, you know, racism don't, I don't ever think about it, it's only sometimes there's some people who say they're a little shocked with it,
you know, it's like, well, you still think that way, do you, you know what I mean, and stuff like that, but other than that,
you know, I wish, I just wish education was a thing I could handle, you know what I mean, you see, you know, because that's what's stopping black people,
and that's where most of the racism comes in, because there's not enough space for everyone in Wales to climb the ladder, you know,
and they're very true, they're picking true so they want to, you know, I mean, I know, because I work in, since I work with Welsh speaking people,
and I work with like, kids in Cardiff High, you know, the rich kids in Cardiff High, they get priority, if you can donate, you know,
that's all they operate, you donate and you're part of this, you know, you'll do anything for your kids to get them to graduate for uni, you know what I'm saying,
I work in Glantaff, they don't care where you come from, you know, they'll help you, that's what from my perspective, because my daughter,
Sophie, she went to a Welsh school, you know, and she comes, she's brighter than the other two, you know what I'm saying,
you know, she is, to be honest with you, she's brighter than the other two, you know, I work in Glantaff over there in the youth, in the youth club there,
I speak to so many different kids, mixed-race kids, kids from in the valleys, you know, and the only thing they don't like is that the fact they have to speak the language in school,
you know, when they're in school, they have to speak Welsh, but once they're outside, you don't have to, so when they come into the centre, we speak English,
most of, well they all do, but you know, and I think a lot of colour people, they'll send their kid to go there, they say, oh the Welsh is not good, they don't want to speak Welsh,
well I tell you what, you go to a Welsh school, you ten times get a better job than any other kids out there, you know, because they want these kids to be bilingual,
you know, they want them to speak the Welsh language, you know, do you speak Welsh?
Yeah, you go, you know, they want them to speak the Welsh language, you know, it's like me, if I get rid of my patwa, who would I be?
You know what I mean, you know, who would I be, you know what I'm saying, you've got to keep part of your culture, you know, you go to anywhere in the world,
you say, believe in Wales, do you speak the language? No, you know what I mean, but you have to, and that's why I respect the Welsh speaking people,
people might say they are this and that, but I know a few of them, and they're tough people, they've got different way of thinking,
just to the other, you know what I mean, so, my friend, he lives in Splough, and you know, his father was the headmaster of Cotay's High School for years and years,
but they went to Welsh speaking school, you know, and most of those people, kids go to Welsh speaking school, you know what I mean,
because I think they reckon their education is a little better standard than it is in the normal school, even though they say Cardiff High,
you know, but there's a lot of Asian in Cardiff High, because when I was there, and they are the brightest, you know what I'm saying,
and there's a lot of resentment over there, because I worked there, and I, in the youth club, and I see the racism that, you know, the kids,
not from the school, because I don't deal with, I'm dealing with the kids in the playground, you know, I could see their attitude to Asian,
but they're not troublemakers, they're just cleverer than the rest of them, and that's all it is, you know, because Sue, her son, her grandson,
because she's got a daughter, Michelle, and her son is in Cardiff High, you know, and doing brilliantly, you know, he's doing robotics and stuff like that,
and just cause she's pushing, pushing, pushing, you know, and he's doing well there, you know, and a lot of the Asians do well there,
a lot of the African black kids that goes there do well, you know, so I wish I had done well in my time, who knows, I could have been a professor or something.
Wow, it's not too late to get into the university.
You know, you're a professor, right?
You're a professor.
Yeah, it's good to know.
Can I take you back for a second? I really wanted to know, what, what did your mother do? Did she do the same thing in Jamaica that she did,
I know you didn't know her in Jamaica, you knew her only when she was in England.
Well, apparently, apparently, she was going to a, is it a teacher's nursing college? Because I think one of my aunties went to that college,
she was going to a nursing thing, you know, and I think that's the reason she came here so early in her life,
because the idea is come to England and finish her studies, you can be a proper midwife or something like that.
What year did she come with you?
She came in the 50s, just after, 59, I think.
And how long after?
Because I was born in 54, you know what I mean? So you can imagine, she left me when I was like a toddler, you know?
So I came here in, I think about 1968, 68, 69, because I remember when I came here, the first year Manchester United won the European Championship,
I think it was about 1968, because I remember watching that on the black and white TV, you know, because that's what we had, you know, I remember then.
So I think it was about 1968 I came here, yes, or late, 60, 67, you know?
But I do remember, I was in Jamaica when England won the World Cup, which was not, that's when Glaston came here, but I was still in Jamaica then,
because Glaston came when I was 10, I came when I, because I think I had one year left in school before when I came,
because when they say you could come to England and bring your kids with you, I think the cutting-edge point was 15, because I leave school at 15,
so I had to come to England before I was 15 years of age, otherwise I wouldn't have been able to until I was 18 or something like that,
so that's where I think they got mixed up, because I could remember my auntie used to take me on the truck to go to Kingston, you know?
So she could sort the paperwork out, because hell of a lot of trouble in there just to get the papers you require to come to England as a kid,
and that's what killed you, you're thinking, shit man, they don't know how the trouble we've gone through to get here, you know what I mean?
And they turn around, they think, oh yeah, you jump on one of those boats coming from France,
you can't walk from the Caribbean to England, you can't, there's no way, you're talking thousands of miles, you know?
So, it's been awesome man, Jesus.
You remember the journey?
Yeah, I remember when my auntie put me on the plane, like I said, I remember we staying off in New York,
I was stuck off in New York, but the fact is, when I got to London, I thought there was someone going to come and get me from there,
so they just stuck me in a room all day, I think I must have been there for about 6, 7 hours in this one room, all by myself,
I cry like a baby, because I'm thinking, where's everyone, who's picking me up, you know?
It's only like about 6 o'clock in the evening, they says, oh come, we're going now, I'm like, where are we going, it's all going to burn in here,
you know, my senior, I think I am in Birmingham, you know, so they flew us from London to Birmingham,
so I actually got two planes to get here, you know, so, and that's where my mum and my stepdad picked us up from,
I can remember they picked us up in the Zephyr 6, you know, those Zephyrs, I don't know, big, you know, because he liked the caruban,
he was quite a poser, you know, he was, yeah, he picked us up in the Zephyr, he was pitch black then, you know, I mean, the day is gone,
I could see his white stuff, because there was snow on the ground, you know, got me back to Dudley Road, man,
there's a fireplace there, I'm just cold, cold, cold, cold, I was cold for 6 months, really, I end up, I get in,
I end up with all these football scars rather than anything else, you know, these are not, you know, but I had chill blame,
you know what chill blame is, I had that when I was a kid, because I used to be sat in front of the fire like that every time my mum turned her back,
you know what I mean, because otherwise, let the heat spread, but it was only two frigging bars, you know what I mean, let the heat spread,
but, and they only would light the fire on the weekend, because we had a fire thing, coke, coke fire, it wasn't even coal, it was coke,
the cheapest stuff, but it used to burn hot, but quicker than the normal coal, it doesn't give off as much smoke,
so when she used to order coke, big bloody lorry used to turn up, emptied a lot of it in the front yard,
so well, I have to shovel it down the cellar, because the cellar is the coldest cellar in history, believe you, me, you go down the cellar,
then you freeze, I swear to God, you open the door, you go, it's frozen, it was a cold cellar, you know what I mean,
but no other one go down there, because I was the eldest, I had to go and get the coal, I was like, Jesus Christ, you knocked down that cellar there,
yeah man, because on top of the cellar, you have the front room, you know, black people, the front room, you don't use it,
you only use that for when relatives or friends come, you know, you've got to heat it up for about a week before it gets hot,
because you're so cold, because it's rotting in the cellar, yeah, so it's a turn it, and that's the only place they had electric heater,
that's the only room, there was electric heater in the front room, you know what I mean, I said turn the heater on in the front room,
leave it on for about a week, because the aunties come from London, or somebody's coming to spend a day or two,
so you get to get in the front room, you get to get the cockerels out, yeah, madness man,
so you know, within that period of time, I learned to cook, so therefore I was quite independent, from back home up until then,
I was independent, you know what I mean, so I didn't have, no one could have, well most of the girlfriend, I had a teacher,
most of the girls, in terms of domesticating themselves and cooking, and you know, I mean so that's how it was,
because all my girls I've been at within Wales, half of them didn't know nothing, you know what I mean,
so you know, that's how it was, I'm teaching them from when I was a kid, you know, so yeah, my mother, she was a,
you know, she used to show me how to season the meat and the chicken, how to brown the chicken and you know, stuff like that,
how to cook the peas before you put the rice in and you know, all them type of stuff, you know what I mean,
I've been doing this since I was a kid, you know what I mean, because I used to have to cook, yeah, I used to have to cook for my younger siblings,
you know, because they're at work, you know what I mean, she used to peel the potato before she goes to work, right,
and the school I went to, which is like, it's called Tivydale Comprehensive, right, it was about five minutes away, right,
I used to leave the potatoes, she says, you got to come home and peel the potatoes,
so when everyone is running around at lunchtime, I had to run home and peel the potatoes,
so when she comes home, she can cook, she can start the cooking, you know what I mean,
so when the kids come home, they can, you know, stuff like that, you know, Sunday, I have to season the meat and you know what I mean, yeah,
because she used to have me walking behind her with her trolley, man, used to go to West Bromwich,
go to West Bromwich, I used to support the Albion, right, every Saturday morning, used to go to Dudley, right,
and she used to stop and talk to everyone, and Lenny Henry's mother, which she knew,
they used to stop in the Dudley town, they used to have a market, right, right in the middle of the town,
they sell West Indian food and you know, unless we were all the black people, used to congregate on Saturday morning,
you know, and I used to be there standing over there in the corner with her trolley, waiting for her to finish talking,
you can't get involved in their discussion, you know what I mean, and she's like, how is Lenny doing, you know what I mean,
Lenny, Lenny was making a name for himself and all that, so every half an hour I'd freeze my nuts off,
like, you know what I mean, it's like, come on, what you can't shout, so, oh my God, so anyway,
and she used to catch the bus then and goes to West Bromwich to pick the meat up from a different place,
she's going to buy meat around the corner, but she got this special man who does the meat, you know,
and she'll catch, just come, we're going to West Bromwich, she's like, what for, we've got to get the meat,
and you know, I'm like, God, here we go, off we go, on the bus to West Brom,
and by this time there's a lot of football supporters who's coming out of Dudley going to the football match,
but the football match is not until three o'clock, and these guys are catching the bus like one, two o'clock, I'm thinking,
so one Saturday morning she said to me, I want you to go to West Bromwich, she ordered the meat,
because she works in West Bromwich in the hospital, so she ordered the meat from the guy to be picked up on the Saturday morning,
so she said, go get the meat, you know, give me a bus fare and stuff to catch a bus to West Brom,
so I went, jumped on the bus, and it was all these full of football supporters, so I'm thinking in my head,
I'm going to a football match, never been to a football match yet, so I think I'm going to a football match, innit,
so I start following the crowd, yeah, I'm following the crowd innit, and I got there and I got off the bus,
the crowd disappeared, you know, all the people on the bus, they just disappeared, and I stood by myself outside the football ground,
I'm like, shit, what am I going to do, I had money to pay, so I walked around, and I walk around one entrance,
and I see people going into this entrance, so I thought, I'll go with this lot innit,
so I'm walking up now, the guy said to me, you're never the security guy, what team you play for man, he goes, what team you play for,
I'm like, what, I said I'm trying to get into the ground, and it's a good job, it was a black guy, well mixed race guy,
and he said, just go back there and go through there, so he let me in, so I walk along the terrace now,
the match haven't even started yet, so I walk along the terrace, and I go to the end,
we're the West Brom and Jalberts supporters, I'm standing there, I'm trying to look for these guys now,
can't see any, they're all white guys, you know what I mean, they're full of white, I'm like, shit, so I stood behind the goals,
I never forget, it was Crystal Palace v West Brom and Jalberts, it was a FA Cup, it was a big match too, it was a FA Cup semi-final,
and so I stood behind the goal, I seen three brilliant headed goals that day, a guy called Jeff Astle,
he was the star of the West Brom and Jalberts football team, he scored a fantastic headed hat-trick,
I stood right there and watched, so I started to support the Albion then, because when I was in Jamaica,
you hear about teams, and I used to support West Ham, and when I came to England, I found out West Ham is in London,
I'm like, bloody hell, that's a farce, because they had World Cup players, see, they had Bobby Moore, they had the Jeffers,
and the people who actually played in the World Cup, so I want to be supporting a team which has got a name,
but I didn't know you had Aston Villa, Wolverhampton Wanderers, West Brom and Jalberts, all in the vicinity of about 20 miles around Birmingham,
so I started to go to the Albion there, and then when I moved to Wolverhampton, I started going to the Maldives,
which is Wolverhampton Wanderers, and I supported them for a few years because my friend, Ralphie, a black guy I met when I went to live there,
he was very close to some of their players, so he introduced me to players like John Richards, Derek Dugan,
these are all famous footballers, and that's how close he could have got to these guys back then,
because they always used to do train and gamble, they always be in the band office, and they used to slip you a fiver there,
have a go, try, you know, and stuff like that, and Ralphie, he knew all this, so he was close to them,
and yeah, that's how it was, football was like, yeah man, and it continues, his life, it was,
but yet, in all that, it's only the one period of racism I encountered when I was in Wolverhampton,
and it wasn't people from Wolverhampton, these people are from, they were Jardis, they were from Newcastle,
other than that I never encountered, I was in a little gang called the Templar Street Mafia,
which, you know, you've got to be part of something, you know, so as we were uptown boys, we used to go uptown,
and they had a little gang called the Templar Street Mafia, because Templar Street is where the Express and Star paper used to be,
and they used to have a little area where they used to stand around, you know, hang around, like something,
and they called themselves Templar Street Mafia, but it was all a mixture of black guys and white guys, Asian guys, you know,
and yeah, I met a guy, he was kind of my best, Krishna his name was, he was Sri Lankan, first Sri Lankan I ever made, you know,
that guy, he was a top top man, you know, everyone loved Krishna, you know, I think because he was rich,
because he was rich, someone in his family was rich, you know, he used to wear the best gear, you know, because back then,
what you wear say a lot, you know, I mean, if you're not wearing the same modern outfit, you can't be in that little posse there,
you know, I mean, because these guys, Ben Sherman and you know, that type of the gear in them days, you know, the Harringtons and stuff like that,
you know, I couldn't afford none of that, but my mate Krishna, you know, I mean, he said, come on, buy your share, bro, you know, I mean,
then, because he used to work in shops, and he knew all the shop, you know, and that's how it was, it was just one fantastic, you know,
I was carefree, if you put it that way, you know, I mean, it's only when I came to Wales, I had to put the socks up, you know,
because kids are involved now, in a different, it's like a different planet, you know, I'm saying it's, yeah, it opens up, you know,
I'm talking to people who I've never spoken to if I was in Birmingham, you know, I mean, like, get close to people in higher positions, you know,
like, sure, I mean, Birmingham, where do you find these people, you know, I mean, so.
Do you feel like your sense of belonging or identity shifted over the years? So you came in as Jamaican. Do you still feel Jamaican? Do you feel more British?
Yeah, well, I tried to feel, I tried to, I would not try and lose my Jamaican identity, even though, who knows, one day I might win the pool,
so I'll go there to live, who knows, but I love the Caribbean, I travel, since I've been to Wales, we traveled all over the Caribbean, you know,
he's only last year I was in St. Lucia, you know, and he's like, it's beautiful, man, you know what I'm saying, I try to do things which I didn't do as a kid,
so I go back to Jamaica now, last year, year before last, we went to the Blue Mountains, right, which I've heard about it, so many, I've never been there, you know what I mean,
so I think if I go to Jamaica, that's where I want to go, you know, so we went to the Blue Mountains up in the, it's beautiful, you know, I mean, you know, I got photography,
you know, I cycled down it as well, you know what I'm saying, that's what I want to do, do things which I didn't get to do as a kid, you know,
when I was a kid, this would be a thing called Roaring River, right, and Roaring River was near to the school I went to, right, and you know, and I've never been to Roaring River,
and that's where, it's a raster community, right, where they do farming and, you know, gardens, beautiful, but as a kid, it wouldn't be like that, and they had a cave there as well,
never been in a cave, you know, so I said, yeah, I want to go to Roaring River, man, I go there, oh my God, my heart melted, you know what I mean, this is next door to where I grew up and born,
I had never been there, like 50 years later, you know what I'm saying, it's like, it turns your head in, you know, yeah, man, and that's what I like to do when I go back, you know what I mean,
and the people, you know, they're there, they don't live there, but it's a very tourist place now, you know what I mean, you can go there, you can book a day to go there, have a meal, you know, play drums,
it's a proper raster camp, you know what I mean, proper documented and everything, you know, they've got brochures where people can go and visit and stuff like that,
but, and that was just on the road from where I grew up, but I never knew anything about it, you know, so I thought, yeah, I'll go back and see that, you know, because you can talk about it, you know, I could remember you said,
because what it was, you know, sugar cane is, in Jamaica at one point, it was the biggest island for cane, when the British was controlling things there, they plant sugar cane everywhere, you know what I mean, so there was a lot of sugar cane,
so there was a place, they call it the Heist, right, there's a, used to be a sugar cane factory, it's on this place called Froum, and Froum, Froum was the biggest sugar cane, what do you call?
Plantation?
Yeah, but where you take the cane to be turned into rum.
Industrial?
Yeah, industrial factory, right, you take it there, so what they do, they have a place called the Heist, if people want to sell the cane, they don't take it direct there, they take it to the Heist, have it weighed, and you get paid there, and then the train comes along, you put it on there, and they put it on a train, and they take it to the factory, so they could pulp it into, you know,
and we used to have the trucks, like the tractors, pulling the canes out, you know what I mean, and they'd be guys on the top, because they don't want, they want the weight, you know what I mean, they'd probably hit you as well, you know what I mean, so you'd pull the cane out, the big one, but until you get to the Heist, but I've never been further than the Heist as a kid, and all that was behind me, all the Ruhran River and all down there, was all down behind the Heist, but I'd never been there, like you know, the furthest I got was up to the Heist,
because what, we were only kids then, you know, so I tried to go back there and I find out, you know, it's like a new world, man, got this Ruhran River place, man, it's beautiful, I don't have a photograph, but I've got a photograph of some of the, let's see if I've got a picture of Ruhran River in here,
I'm sorry, are we still talking?
No, you can have a look at that, so in terms of your identity, you feel Jamaican, you don't feel British?
Nah, I feel more Welsh than British to be honest, because I lived here longer than I lived in England, you know, so, kids are Welsh, you know what I'm saying, so Welsh is like my second home, isn't it, you know,
I mean, I go to England, I've, nothing changed in Britain, man, too much people, that's why, you know, jump on the bus, the bus is full, the walk on the street, the sidewalk is full, you know, the noises, I come back to Wales, I feel much more comfortable,
so, yeah, that's me, man, but I'll go anywhere, you know, obviously, I've met so many people over the years since I've been here, you know what I mean, it's good people too, you know what I mean, knowing that they're straight,
I mean, living in the middlelands at the time, you didn't know who to trust, you know, there's so much things going on, you know, so many trickery, so many drugs, and, you know, and I know, if I had still been there, I wouldn't be sitting there talking to you now, you know, because it's totally different, you know what I'm saying,
I know people calling me, one day, I got people ringing me up, call me Colombo, they call me Colombo, you know, I'm coming down, you know, they're desperate to get out, you know what I mean, they are desperate to move out, you know, so they goes there, I go back down there and say, boy, you look good, Colombo, yeah, you know what I mean, stuff like that, you know, and I'm older than them, you know, you know what I mean, so, I'm thinking, don't do what you do, man, I don't bleach anymore, I don't spend, you know, don't smoke, you know, you know, don't need, you know, I'm done, I'm done, man, I'm done, I'm done.
weed and don't eat and you know I goes up my bike you know there's room for me to go and exercise
you know I'm saying in Birmingham there's no such thing you know there is but you'll have to travel
you know where I can just jump from a bike now I could go to the break-ins I'm back you know without
no traffic no anything no fumes I think that's part of it as well you know the air condition down
is much better it's much warmer as well then you wouldn't believe how cold burning it is Jesus
is fucking cold side it is freezing you know this fog you wake up in the morning you can't die
you can see out the window there's so much fog here it is you know it's just you know people
walking around with whatever you know so it's healthier living down here to be honest you know
it's much healthier your condition is better and there's less people not many people very
rocking up my door you know it's people who I invite not people who just turn up because
you know I mean I like it like that you know like the peace and quiet you know like the
the hustle and the bustle you know I mean yeah so who knows one day I might win the
pools if I was to go back and leave Cardiff you'd be going back to the Caribbean somewhere
you know I mean I would not say I would want to go back to Birmingham to live
you know because it's it's like to me you'll be going backwards if I had education and I could go
go back there and help you know like working in the with young people and help in that way I would
you know but just to go back and live no I don't think so you know I could find somewhere better
than this to see you know my house somewhere you know out in the country somewhere yeah it'd be
that would be ideal you know that would be somewhere near the sea perhaps you like what
you like yeah yeah well live on one of those Caribbean islands out there so maybe Trinidad
who knows yeah because I have been to Tobago I've not been to Trinidad I've been to Tobago
it's similar to Jamaica you know all the islands are similar you know there is
you know we do the same thing yeah good stuff you finished now
oh dear